<h1> Early Detection of Diabetic Retinopathy Using Self-Supervised Vision Transformers on Fundus and OCT Imaging </h1>
<p>One of the leading reasons for blindness is diabetic retinopathy (DR), which has to be diagnosed early and accurately in order to be treated properly. Advanced deep learning algorithms can substantially improve illness onset analysis and diagnostic accuracy. Generalisability of existing deep learning methods over a wide range of imaging modalities, such as fundus and OCT/OCTA images, is often lacking. Also, most models suffer from strong severity staging and good feature extraction, which limits their applicability in a clinical setting. For enhancing DR detection in a number of imaging modalities, this work plans to develop a deep learning framework that leverages Swin Transformer and contrastive learning techniques. We pretrain on huge medical datasets using a hybrid self-supervised learning (SSL) methodology.SimCLR is applied for fundus image representation learning, DINO for fine-grained segmentation and severity staging, and MoCo for scalable OCT/OCTA training. These contrastive learning methods enhance feature extraction and increase model generalizability.Our method enhances diagnostic performance, optimally extracts clinically significant features, and improves disease severity staging. Results are enhanced when SSL and Swin Transformer are combined compared to conventional deep learning models. In addition to enabling early diagnosis and treatment planning, this technique provides a more robust, scalable, and interpretable solution for DR diagnosis and provides better insight into the disease's progression.</p>

